---
title: "3.4 READING AND WRITING DISK BLOCKS"
date: "2018-05-05T15:28:00+08:00"
---

Now that the buffer allocation algorithm has been covered, the procedures for reading and writing disk blocks should be easy to understand. To read a disk block (Figure 3.13), a process uses algorithm *getblk* to search for it in the buffer cache. If it is in the cache, the kernel can return it immediately without physically reading the block from the disk. If it is not in the cache, the kernel calls the disk driver to "schedule" a read request and goes to sleep awaiting the event thin the I/O completes. The disk driver notifies the disk controller hardware that it wants to read data, and the disk controller later transmits the data to the buffer. Finally, the disk controller interrupts the processor when the I/O is complete, and the disk interrupt handler awakens the sleeping process; the contents of the disk block are now in the buffer. The modules that requested the particular block now have the data; when they no longer need the buffer they release it so that other processes can access it.

```text
algorithm bread     /* block read */
input:  file system block number
output: buffer containing data
{
    get buffer for block (algorithm getblk);
    if (buffer data valid)
        return buffer;
    initiate disk read;
    sleep(event disk read complete);
    return (buffer);
}
```

**Figure 3.13.** Algorithm for Reading a Disk Block

Chapter 5 shows how higher-level kernel modules (such as the file subsystem) may anticipate the need for a second disk block when a process reads a file sequentially. The modules request the second I/O asynchronously in the hope that the data will be in memory when needed, improving performance. To do this, the kernel executes the block read-ahead algorithm *breada* (Figure 3.14): The kernel checks if the first block is in the cache and, if it is not there, invokes the disk driver to read that block. If the second block is not in the buffer cache, the kernel instructs the disk driver to read it asynchronously. Then the process goes to sleep awaiting the event that the I/O is complete on the first block. When it awakens, it returns the buffer for the first block, and does not care when the I/O for the second block completes. When the I/O for the second block does complete, the disk controller interrupts the system; the interrupt handler recognizes that the I/O was asynchronous and releases the buffer (algorithm *brelse*). If it would not release the buffer, the buffer would remain locked and, therefore, inaccessible to all processes. It is impossible to unlock the buffer beforehand, because I/O to the buffer was active, and hence the buffer contents were not valid. Later, if the process wants to read the second block, it should find it in the buffer cache, the I/O having completed in the meantime. If, at the beginning of *breada*, the first block was in the buffer cache, the kernel immediately checks if the second block is in the cache and proceeds as just described.

```text
algorithm breada    /* block read and read ahead */
input:  (1) file system block number for immediate read
        (2) file system block number for asynchronous read
output: buffer containing data for immediate read
{
    if (first block not in cache)
    {
        get buffer for first block (algorithm getblk);
        if (buffer data not valid)
            initiate disk read;
    }
    if (second block not in cache)
    {
        get buffer for second block (algorithm getblk);
        if (buffer data valid)
            release buffer (algorithm brelse);
        else
            initiate disk read;
    }
    if (first block was originally in cache)
    {
        read first block (algorithm bread);
        return buffer;
    }
    sleep(event first buffer contains valid data);
    return buffer;
}
```

**Figure 3.14.** Algorithm for Block Read Ahead

The algorithm for writing the contents of a buffer to a disk block is similar (Figure 3.15). The kernel informs the disk driver that it has a buffer whose contents should be output, and the disk driver schedules the block for I/O. If the write is synchronous, the calling process goes to sleep awaiting I/O completion and releases the buffer when it awakens. If the write is asynchronous, the kernel starts the disk write but does not wait for the write to complete. The kernel will release the buffer when the I/O completes.

```text
algorithm bwrite    /* block write */
input:  buffer
output: none
{
    initiate disk write;
    if (I/O synchronous)
    {
        sleep(event I/O complete);
        release buffer (algorithm brelse);
    }
    else if (buffer marked for delayed write)
        mark buffer to put at head of free list;
}
```

**Figure 3.15.** Algorithm for Writing a Disk Block

There are occasions, described in the next two chapters, when the kernel does not write data immediately to disk. If it does a "delayed write," it marks the buffer accordingly, releases the buffer using algorithm *brelse*, and continues without scheduling I/O. The kernel writes the block to disk before another process can reallocate the buffer to another block, as described in scenario 3 of *getblk*. In the
meantime, the kernel hopes that a process accesses the block before the buffer must be written to disk; if that process subsequently changes the contents of the buffer, the kernel saves an extra disk operation.

A delayed write is different from an *asynchronous write*. When doing an asynchronous write, the kernel starts the disk operation immediately but does not wait for its completion. For a "delayed write," the kernel puts off the physical write to disk as long as possible; then, recalling the third scenario in algorithm *getblk*, it marks the buffer "old" and writes the block to disk asynchronously. The disk controller later interrupts the system and releases the buffer, using algorithm *brelse*; the buffer ends up on the head of the free list, because it was "old." Because of the two asynchronous I/O operations - block read ahead and delayed write - the kernel can invoke *brelse* from an interrupt handler. Hence, it must prevent interrupts in any procedure that manipulates the buffer free list, because *brelse* places buffers on the free list.