---
title: "3.6 SUMMARY"
date: "2018-05-05T16:07:00+08:00"
---

This chapter has presented the structure of the buffer cache and the various methods by which the kernel locates blocks in the cache. The buffer algorithms combine several simple ideas to provide a sophisticated caching mechanism. The kernel uses the least-recently-used replacement algorithm to keep blocks in the buffer cache, assuming that blocks that were recently accessed are likely to be accessed again soon. The order that the buffers appear on the free list specifies the order in which they were last used. Other buffer replacement algorithms, such as first-in-first-out or least-frequently-used, are either more complicated to implement or result in lower cache hit ratios. The hash function and hash queues enable the kernel to find particular blocks quickly, and use of doubly linked lists makes it easy
to remove buffers from the lists.

The kernel identifies the block it needs by supplying a logical device number­ and block number. The algorithm getblk searches the buffer cache for a block and; if the buffer is present and free, locks the buffer and returns it. If the buffer is locked, the requesting process sleeps until it becomes free. The locking mechanism ensures that only one process at a time manipulates a buffer. If the block is not in the cache, the kernel reassigns a free buffer to the block, locks it and returns it. The algorithm *bread* allocates a buffer for a block and reads the data into the buffer, if necessary. The algorithm *bwrite* copies data into a previously allocated buffer. If, in execution of certain higher-level algorithms, the kernel determines that it is not necessary to copy the data immediately to disk, it marks the buffer "delayed write" to avoid unnecessary I/O. Unfortunately, the "delayed write" scheme means that a process is never sure when the data is physically on disk. If the kernel writes data synchronously to disk, it invokes the disk driver to write the block to the file system and waits for an I/O completion interrupt.

The kernel uses the buffer cache in many ways. It transmits data between application programs and the file system via the buffer cache, and it transmits auxiliary system data such as inodes between higher-level kernel algorithms and the file system. It also uses the buffer cache when reading programs into memory for execution. The following chapters will describe many algorithms that use the procedures described in this chapter. Other algorithms that cache inodes and pages of memory also use techniques similar to those described for the buffer cache.