---
title: "3.7 EXERCISES"
date: "2018-05-05T16:10:00+08:00"
---

1\. Consider the hash function in Figure 3.3. The best hash function is one that distributes the blocks uniformly over the set of hash queues. What would be an optimal hashing function? Should a hash function use the logical device number in its calculations?

2\. In the algorithm *getblk*, if the kernel removes a buffer from the free list, it must raise the processor priority level to block out interrupts before checking the free list. Why?

3\.<sup>*</sup> In algorithm *getblk*, the kernel must raise the processor priority level to block out interrupts before checking if a block is busy. (This is not shown in the text.) Why?

4\. In algorithm *brelse*, the kernel enqueues the buffer at the head of the free list if the buffer contents are invalid. If the contents are invalid, should the buffer appear on a hash queue?

5\. Suppose the kernel does a delayed write of a block. What happens when another process takes that block from its hash queue? From the free list?

6\.<sup>*</sup> If several processes contend for a buffer, the kernel guarantees that none of them sleep forever, but it does not guarantee that a process will not be starved out from use of a buffer. Redesign *getblk* so that a process is guaranteed eventual use of a buffer.

7\. Redesign the algorithms for *getblk* and *brelse* such that the kernel does not follow a least-recently-used scheme but a first-in-first-out scheme. Repeat this problem using a least-frequently-used scheme.

8\. Describe a scenario where the buffer data is already valid in algorithm *bread*.

9\.<sup>*</sup> Describe the various scenarios that can happen in algorithm *breada*. What happens on the next invocation of *bread* or *breada* when the current read-ahead block will be read? In algorithm *breada*, if the first or second block are not in the cache, the later test to see if the buffer data is valid implies that the block could be in the buffer pool. How is this possible?

10\. Describe an algorithm that asks for and receives any free buffer from the buffer pool. Compare this algorithm to *getblk*.

11\. Various system calls such as umount and sync (Chapter 5) require the kernel to flush to disk all buffers that are "delayed write" for a particular file system. Describe an algorithm that implements a buffer flush. What happens to the order of buffers on the free list as a result of the flush operation? How can the kernel be sure that no other process sneaks in and writes a buffer with delayed write to the file system while the flushing process sleeps waiting for an I/O completion?

12\. Define system response time as the average time it takes to complete a system call. Define system throughput as the number of processes the system can execute in a given time period. Describe how the buffer cache can help response time. Does it necessarily help system throughput?