---
title: "1.1 HISTORY"
date: "2018-04-27T21:40:00+08:00"
---

In 1965, Bell Telephone Laboratories joined an effort with the General Electric Company and Project MAC of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to develop a new operating system called Multics [Organick 72] The goals of the Multics system were to provide simultaneous computer access to a large community of users, to supply ample computation power and data storage, and to allow users to share their data easily, if desired. Many people who later took part in the early development of the UNIX system participated in the Multics work at Bell Laboratories. Although a primitive version of the Multics system was running on a GE 645 computer by 1969, it did not provide the general service computing for which it was intended, nor was it clear when its development goals would be met. Consequently, Bell Laboratories ended its participation in the project.

With the end of their work on the Multics project, members of the Computing Science Research Center at Bell Laboratories were left without a "convenient interactive computing service" [Ritchie 84a]. In an attempt to improve their programming environment, Ken Thompson, Dennis Ritchie, and others sketched a paper design of a file. system that later evolved into an early version of the UNIX file system. Thompson wrote programs that simulated the behavior of the proposed file system and of programs in a demand-paging environment, and he even encoded a simple kernel for the GE 645 computer. At the same time, he wrote a game program, "Space Travel," in Fortran for a GECOS system (the Honeywell 635), but the program was unsatisfactory because it was difficult to control the "space ship" and the program was expensive to run. Thompson later found a little-used PDP-7 computer that provided good graphic display and cheap executing power. Programming "Space Travel" for the PDP-7 enabled Thompson to learn about the machine, but its environment for program development required cross-assembly of the program on the GECOS machine and carrying paper tape for input to the PDP-7. To create a better development environment, Thompson and Ritchie implemented their system design on the PDP-7, including an early version of the UNIX file system, the process subsystem, and a small set of utility programs. Eventually, the new system no longer needed the GECOS system as a development environment but could support itself. The new system was given the name UNIX, a pun on the name Multics coined by another member of the Computing Science Research Center, Brian Kernighan.

Although this early version of the UNIX system held much promise, it could not realize its potential until it was used in a real project. Thus, while providing a text processing system for the patent department at Bell Laboratories, the UNIX system was moved to a PDP-11 in 1971. The system was characterized by its small size: 16K bytes for the system, 8K bytes for user programs, a disk of 512K bytes, and a limit of 64K bytes per file. After its early success, Thompson set out to implement a Fortran compiler for the new system, but instead came up with the language B, influenced by BCPL [Richards 691]. B was an interpretive language with the performance drawbacks implied by such languages, so Ritchie developed it into one he called C, allowing generation of machine code, declaration of data
types, and definition of data structures. In 1 973, the operating system was rewritten in C, an unheard of step at the time, but one that was to have tremendous impact on its acceptance among outside users. The number of installations at Bell Laboratories grew to about 25, and a UNIX Systems Group was formed to provide internal support.

At this time, AT&T could not market computer products because of a 1956 Consent Decree it had signed with the Federal government, but it provided the UNIX system to universities who requested it for educational purposes. AT&T neither advertised, marketed, nor supported the system, in adherence to the terms of the Consent Decree. Nevertheless, the system's popularity steadily increased. In 1974. Thompson and Ritchie published a paper describing the UNIX system in the Communications of the ACM [Thompson 74], giving further impetus to its acceptance. By 1977, the number of UNIX system sites had grown to about 500, of which 125 were in universities. UNIX systems became popular in the operating telephone companies, providing a good environment for program development, network transaction operations services, and real-time services (via MERT [Lycklama 78a]). Licenses of UNIX systems were provided to commercial institutions as well as universities. In 1977, Interactive Systems Corporation became the first Value Added Reseller (VAR)<sup>1</sup> of a UNIX system, enhancing it for use in office automation environments. 1977 also marked the year that the UNIX system was first "ported" to a non-PDP machine (that is, made to run on
another machine with few or no changes) , the Interdata 8 / 32.

With the growing popularity of microprocessors, other companies ported the UNIX system to new machines, but its simplicity and clarity tempted many developers to enhance it in their own way, resulting in several variants of the basic system. In the period from 1977 to 1982, Bell Laboratories combined several
AT&T variants into a single system, known commercially as UNIX System III. Bell Laboratories later added several features to UNIX System III, calling the new product UNIX System V,<sup>2</sup> and AT&T announced official support for System V in January 1983. However, people at the University of California at Berkeley had developed a variant to the UNIX system, the most recent version of which is called 4.3 BSD for VAX machines; providing some new, interesting features. This book will concentrate on the description of UNIX System V and will occasionally talk about features provided in the BSD system.

By the beginnig of 1984, there were about 100,000 UNIX system installations in the world, running on machines with a wide range of computing power from microprocessors to mainframes and on machines across different manufacturers' product lines. No other operating system can make that claim. Several reasons have been suggested for the popularity and success of the UNIX system.

* The system is written in a high-level language, making it easy to read, understand, change, and move to other machines. Ritchie estimates that the first system in C was 20 to 40 percent larger and slower because it was not written in assembly language, but the advantages of using a higher-level language far outweigh the disadvantages (see page 1965 of [Ritchie 78b]).

* It has a simple user interface that has the power to provide the services that users want.
* It provides primitives that permit complex programs to be built from simpler programs.
* It uses a hierarchical file system that allows easy maintenance and efficient implementation.
* It uses a consistent format for files, the byte stream, making application programs easier to write.
* It provides a simple, consistent interface to peripheral devices.
* It is a multi-user, multiprocess system; each user can execute several processes simultaneously.
* It hides the machine architecture from the user, making it easier to write programs that run on different hardware implementations.

The philosophy of simplicity and consistency underscores the UNIX system and accounts for many of the reasons cited above.

Although the operating system and many of the command programs are written in C, UNIX systems support other languages, including Fortran, Basic, Pascal, Ada, Cobol, Lisp, and Prolog. The UNIX systrm can support any language that has a compiler or interpreter and a system interface that maps user requests for operating system services to the standard set of requests used on UNIX systems.

------

1. Vahle Added Resellers add specific applications to a computer system to satisfy a particular market. They market the applications rather than the operating system upon which they run.

2. What happened to System IV? An internal version of the system evolved into System V.