---
date: "2018-04-29T11:12:00+08:00"
title: "1.4 OPERATING SYSTEM SERVICES"
---

Figure 1.1 depicts the kernel layer immediately below the layer of user application programs. The kernel performs various primitive operations on behalf of user processes to support the user interface described above. Among the services provided by the kernel are

* Controlling the execution of processes by allowing their creation, termination or suspension, and communication
* Scheduling processes fairly for execution on the CPU. Processes share the CPU in a *time-shared* manner: the CPU<sup>5</sup> executes a process, the kernel suspends it when its time quantum elapses, and the kernel schedules another process to execute. The kernel later reschedules the suspended process.
* Allocating main memory for an executing process. The kernel allows processes to share portions of their address space under certain conditions, but protects the private address space of a process from outside tampering. If the system runs low on free memory, the kernel frees memory by writing a process temporarily to secondary memory, called a *swap* device. If the kernel writes entire processes to a swap device, the implementation of the UNIX system is called a *swapping* system; if it writes pages or memory to a swap device, it is called a *paging* system.
* Allocating secondary memory for efficient storage and retrieval of user data. This service constitutes the file system. The kernel allocates secondary storage for user files, reclaims unused storage, structures the file system in a well understood manner, and protects user files from illegal access.
* Allowing processes controlled access to peripheral devices such as terminals, tape drives, disk drives, and network devices.

The kernel provides its services transparently. For example, it recognizes that a given file is a regular file or a device, but hides the distinction from user processes. Similarly, it formats data in a file for internal storage, but hides the internal format from user processes, returning an unformatted byte stream. Finally, it offers necessary services so that user-level processes can support the services they must provide, while omitting services that can be implemented at the user level. For example, the kernel supports the services that the shell needs to act as a command interpreter: It allows the shell to read terminal input, to spawn processes dynamically, to synchronize process execution, to create pipes, and to redirect I/O. Users can construct private versions of the shell to tailor their environments to their specifications without affecting other users. These programs use the same kernel services as the standard shell.

------

5\. Chapter 12 will consider multiprocessor systems; until then, assume a single processor model.