---
title: "5.3 WRITE"
date: "2018-10-07T16:28:00+08:00"
---

The syntax for the *write* system call is

```c
number = write(fd, buffer, count);
```

where the meaning of the variables *fd*, *buffer*, *count*, and *number* are the same as they are for the *read* system call. The algorithm for writing a regular file is similar to that for reading a regular file. However, if the file does not contain a block that corresponds to the byte offset to be written, the kernel allocates a new block using algorithm *alloc* and assigns the block number to the correct position in the inode's table of contents. If the byte offset is that of an indirect block, the kernel may have to allocate several blocks for use as indirect blocks and data blocks. The inode is locked for the duration of the *write*, because the kernel may change the inode when allocating new blocks; allowing other processes access to the file could corrupt the inode if several processes allocate blocks simultaneously for the same byte offsets. When the write is complete, the kernel updates the file size entry in the inode if the file has grown larger.

For example, suppose a process writes byte number 10,240 to a file, the highest-numbered byte yet written to the file. When accessing the byte in the file using algorithm *bmap*, the kernel will find not only that the file does not contain a block for that byte but also that it does not contain the necessary indirect block. It assigns a disk block for the indirect block and writes the block number in the incore inode. Then it assigns a disk block for the data block and writes its block number into the first position in the newly assigned indirect block.

The kernel goes through an internal loop, as in the *read* algorithm, writing one block to disk during each iteration. During each iteration, it determines whether it will write the entire block or only part of it. If it writes only part of a block, it must first read the block from disk so as not to overwrite the parts that will remain the same, but if it writes the whole block, it need not read the block, since it will overwrite its previous contents anyway. The write proceeds block by block, but the kernel uses a *delayed write* (Section 3.4) to write the data to disk, caching it in
case another process should *read* or *write* it soon and avoiding extra disk operations. Delayed write is probably most effective for pipes, because another process is reading the pipe and removing its data (Section 5.12). But even for regular files, delayed write is effective if the file is created temporarily and will be read soon. For example, many programs, such as editors and mail, create temporary files in the directory "/tmp" and quickly remove them. Use of delayed write can reduce the number of disk writes for temporary files.
