---
title: "5.5 ADJUSTING THE POSITION OF FILE I/O - LSEEK"
date: "2018-10-07T16:42:00+08:00"
---

The ordinary use of *read* and *write* system calls provides sequential access to a file, but processes can use the *lseek* system call to position the I/O and allow random access to a file. The syntax for the system call is

```c
position = lseek(fd, offset, reference);
```

where *fd* is the file descriptor identifying the file, *offset* is a byte offset, and *reference* indicates whether *offset* should be considered from the beginning of the file, from the current position of the read/write offset, or from the end of the file. The return value, *position*, is the byte offset where the next *read* or *write* will start. In the program in Figure 5.10, for example, a process *opens* a file, *reads* a byte, then invokes *lseek* to advance the file table offset value by 1023 (with *reference* 1), and loops. Thus, the program *reads* every 1024th byte of the file. If the value of *reference* is 0, the kernel seeks from the beginning of the file, and if its value is 2, the kernel seeks beyond the end of the file. The *lseek* system call has nothing to do with the seek operation that positions a disk arm over a particular disk sector. To implement *lseek*, the kernel simply adjusts the offset value in the file table; subsequent *read* or *write* system calls use the file table offset as their starting byte offset.

```c
#include <fcntl.h>
main(argc, argv)
    int argc;
    char *argv[];
{
    int fd, skval;
    char c;

    if (argc != 2)
        exit();
    fd = open(argv[1], O_RDONLY);
    if (fd == -1)
        exit();
    while ((skval = read(fd, &c, 1)) == 1)
    {
        printf("char %c\n", c);
        skval = lseek(fd, 1023L, 1);
        printf("new seek val %d\n", skval);
    }
}
```

**Figure 5.10.** Program with Lseek System Call