---
title: "5.7 FILE CREATION"
date: "2018-10-07T17:02:00+08:00"
---

The *open* system call gives a process access to an existing file, but the *creat* system call creates a new file in the system. The syntax for the creat system call is

```c
fd = creat(pathname, modes);
```

where the variables *pathname*, *modes*, and *fd* mean the same as they do in the *open* svstem call. If no such file previously existed, the kernel creates a new file with the specified name and permission modes; if the file already existed, the kernel truncates the file (releases all existing data blocks and sets the file size to 0) subject to suitable file access permissions.<sup>3</sup> Figure 5.12 shows the algorithm for file creation.

```text
algorithm creat
input:  file name
        permission settings
output: file descriptor
{
    get inode for file name (algorithm namei);
    if (file already exists)
    {
        if (not permitted access)
        {
            release inode (algorithm iput);
            return(error);
        }
    }
    else    /* file does not exist yet */
    {
        assign free inode from file system (algorithm ialloc);
        create new directory entry in parent directory: include new file name and newly assigned inode number;
    }
    allocate file table entry for inode, initialize count;
    if (file did exist at time of create)
        free all file blocks (algorithm free);
    unlock(inode);
    return(user file descriptor);
}
```

**Figure 5.12.** Algorithm for Creating a File

The kernel parses the path name using algorithm *namei*, following the algorithm literally while parsing directory names. However, when it arrives at the last component of the path name, namely, the file name that it will create, *namei* notes the byte offset of the first empty directory slot in the directory and saves the offset in the *u area*. If the kernel does not find the path name component in the directory, it will eventually write the name into the empty slot just found. If the directory has no empty slots, the kernel remembers the offset of the end of the directory and creates a new slot there. It also remembers the inode of the directory being searched in its *u area* and keeps the inode locked; the directory will become the parent directory of the new file. The kernel does not write the new file name into the directory yet, so that it has less to undo in event of later errors. It checks that the directory allows the process write permission: Becsuse a process will write the directory as a result of the *creat* call, write permission for a directory means that processes are allowed to create files in the directory.

Assuming no file by the given name previously existed, the kernel assigns an inode for the new file, using algorithm *ialloc* (Section 4.6). It then writes the new file name component and the inode number of the newly allocated inode in the parent directory, at the byte offset saved in the *u area*. Afterwards, it releases the inode of the parent directory, having held it from the time it searched the directory for the file name. The parent directory now contains the name of the new file and its inode number. The kernel writes the newly allocated inode to disk (algorithm *bwrite*) before it writes the directory with the new name to disk. If the system crashes between the write operations for the inode and the directory, there will be an allocated inode that is not referenced by any path name in the system but the system will function normally. If, on the other hand, the directory were written before the newly allocated inode and the system crashed in the middle, the file system would contain a path name that referred to a bad inode. (See Section
5.16.1 for more detail.)

If the given file already existed before the *creat*, the kernel finds its inode while searching for the file name. The old file must allow write permission for a process to create a "new" file by the same name, because the kernel changes the file contents during the *creat* call: It truncates the file, freeing all its data blocks using algorithm *free*, so that the file looks like a newly created file. However, the owner and permission modes of the file are the same as they were for the original file: The kernel does not reassign ownership to the owner of the process, and it ignores
the permission modes specified by the process. Finally, the kernel does not check that the parent directory of the existing file allows write permission, because it will not change the directory contents.

The *creat* system call proceeds according to the same algorithm as the *open* system call. The kernel allocates an entry in the file table for the created file so that the process can *write* the file, allocates an entry in the user file descriptor table, and eventually returns the index to the latter entry as the user file descriptor.

------

3\. The *open* system call specifies twc flags, *O_CREAT* (create) and *O_TRUNC* (truncate): If a process specifies the *O_CREAT* flag on an *open* and the file does not exist, the kernel will create the file. If the file already exists, it will not be truncated unless the *O_TRUNC* flag is also set.