---
title: "5.8 CREATION OF SPECIAL FILES"
date: "2018-10-07T17:40:00+08:00"
---

The system call *mknod* creates special files in the system, including named pipes, device files, and directories. It is similar to *creat* in that the kernel allocates an inode for the file. The syntax of the *mknod* system call is

```c
mknod(pathname, type and permissions, dev)
```

where *pathname* is the name of the node to be created, *type* and *permissions* give the node type (directory, for example) and access permissions for the new file to be created, and *dev* specifies the major and minor device numbers for block and character special files (Chapter 10). Figure 5.13 depicts the algorithm *mknod* for making a new node.

```text
algorithm make new node
inputs: node (file name)
        file type
        permissions
        major, minor device number (for block, character special files)
output: none
{
    if (new node not named pipe and user not super user)
        return(error);
    get inode of parent of new node (algorithm namei);
    if (new node already exists)
    {
        release parent inode (algorithm iput);
        return(error);
    }
    assign free inode from file system for new node (algorithm ialloc);
    create new directory entry in parent directory: include new node name and newly assigned inode number;
    release parent directory inode (algorithm iput);
    if (new node is block or character special file)
        write major, minor numbers into inode structure;
    release new node inode (algorithm iput);
}
```

**Figure 5.13.** Algorithm for Making New Node

The kernel searches the file system for the file name it is about to create. If the file does not yet exist, the kernel assigns a new inode on the disk and writes the new file name and inode number into the parent directory. It sets the file type field in the inode to indicate that the file type is a pipe, directory or special file. Finally, if the file is a *character special* or *block special* device file, it writes the major and minor device numbers into the inode. If the *mknod* call is creating a directory node, the node will exist after the system call completes but its contents will be in the wrong format (there are no directory entries for "." and ".."). Exercise 5.33 considers the other steps needed to put a directory into the correct format.