---
title: "5.9 CHANGE DIRECTORY AND CHANGE ROOT"
date: "2018-10-07T17:53:00+08:00"
---

When the system is first booted, process 0 makes the file system root its current directory during initialization. It executes the algorithm *iget* on the root inode, saves it in the *u area* as its current directory, and releases the inode lock. When a new process is created via the *fork* system call, the new process inherits the current directory of the old process in its *u area*, and the kernel increments the inode reference count accordingly.

```text
algorithm change directory
input:  new directory name
output: none
{
    get inode for new directory name (algorithm namei);
    if (inode not that of directory or process not permitted access to file)
    {
        release inode (algorithm iput);
        return (error);
    }
    unlock inode;
    release "old" current directory inode (algorithm iput);
    place new inode into current directory slot in u area;
}
```

**Figure 5.14.** Algorithm for Changing Current Directory

The algorithm *chdir* (Figure 5.14) changes the current directory of a process. The syntax for the *chdir* systein call is

```c
chdir(pathname);
```

where *pathname* is the directory that becomes the new current directory of the process. The kernel parses the name of the target directory using algorithm *namei* and checks that the target file is a directory and that the process owner has access permission to the directory. It releases the lock to the new inode but keeps the inode allocated and its reference count incremented, releases the inode of the old current directory (algorithm *iput*) stored in the *u area*, and stores the new inode in the *u area*. After a process changes its current directory, algorithm *namei* uses the
inode for the start directory to search for all path names that do not begin from root. After execution of the *chdir* system call, the inode reference count of the new directory is at least one, and the inode reference count of the previous current directory may be 0. In this respect, *chdir* is similar to the *open* system call. because both system calls access a file and leave its inode allocated. The inode allocated during the *chdir* system call is released only when the process executes another *chdir* call or when it *exits*.

A process usually uses the global file system root for all path names starting with "/". The kernel contains a global variable that points to the inode of the global root, allocated by *iget* when the system is booted. Processes can change their notion of the file system root via the *chroot* system call. This is useful if a user wants to simulate the usual file system hierarchy and run processes there. Its syntax is

```c
chroot(pathname);
```

where *pathname* is the directory that the kernel subsequently treats as the process's root directory. When executing the *chroot* system call, the kernel follows the same algorithm as for changing the current directory. It stores the new root inode in the process *u area*, unlocking the inode on completion of the system call. However, since the default root for the kernel is stored in a global variable, it does not release the inode of the old root automatically, but only if it or an ancestor process had executed the *chroot* system call. The new inode is now the logical root of the file system for the process (and all its children), meaning that all path name searches in algorithm *namei* that start from root ("/") start from this inode, and that all attempts to use ".." over the root will leave the working directory of the process in the new root. A process bestows new child processes with its changed root, just as it bestows them with its current directory.