---
title: "4.1 INODES"
date: "2018-05-09T13:11:00+08:00"
---

## 4.1.1 Definition

Inodes exist in a static form on disk, and the kernel reads them into an in-core inode to manipulate them. Disk inodes consist of the following fields:

* File owner identifier. Ownership is divided between an individual owner and a "group" owner and defines the set of users who have access rights to a file. The superuser has access rights to all files in the system.
* File type. Files may be of type regular, directory, character or block special, or FIFO (pipes).
* File access permissions. The system protects files according to three classes: the owner and the group owner of the file, and other users; each class his access rights to read, write and execute the file, which can be set individually. Because directories cannot be executed, execution permission for a directory gives the right to search the directory for a file name.
* File access times, giving the time the file was last modified, when it was last accessed, and when the inode was last modified.
* Number of links to the file, representing the number of names the file has in the directory hierarchy. Chapter 5 explains file links in detail.
* Table of contents for the disk addresses of data in a file. Although users treat the data in a file as a logical stream of bytes, the kernel saves the data in discontiguous disk blocks. The inode identifies the disk blocks that contain the file's data.
* File size. Data in a file is addressable by the number of bytes from the beginning of the file, starting from byte offset 0, and the file size is 1 greater than the highest byte offset of data in the file. For example, if a user creates a file and writes only 1 byte of data at byte offset 1000 in the file, the size of the file is 1001 bytes.

The inode does not specify the path name(s) that access the file.

```text
owner mjb
group os
type regular file
perms rwxr-xr-x
accessed Oct 23 1984 1:45 P.M.
modified Oct 22 1984 10:30 A.M.
inode Oct 23 1984 1:30 P.M.
size 6030 bytes
disk addresses
```

**Figure 4.2.** Sample Disk Inode

Figure 4.2 shows the disk inode of a sample file. This inode is that of a regular file owned by "mjb," which contains 6030 bytes. The system permits "mjb" to read, write, or execute the file; members of the group "os" and all other users can only read or execute the file, not write it. The last time anyone read the file was on October 23, 1984, at 1:45 in the afternoon, and the last time anyone wrote the file was on October 22, 1984, at 10:30 in the morning. The inode was last changed on October 23, 1984, at 1:30 in the afternoon, although the data in the file was not written at that time. The kernel encodes the above information in the inode. Note the distinction between writing the contents of an inode to disk and writing the contents of a file to disk. The contents of a file change only when writing it. The contents of an inode change when changing the contents of a file or when changing its owner, permission, or link settings. Changing the contents of a file automatically implies a change to the inode, but changing the inode does not imply that the contents of the file change.

The in-core copy of the inode contains the following fields in addition to the fields of the disk inode:

* The status of the in-core inode, indicating whether
  * the inode is locked,
  * a process is waiting for the inode to become unlocked,
  * the in-core representation of the inode differs from the disk copy as a result of a change to the data in the inode,
  * the in-core representation of the file differs from the disk copy as a result of a change to the file data,
  * the file is a mount point (Section 5.15).
* The logical device number of the file system that contains the file.
* The inode number. Since inodes are stored in a linear array on disk (recall Section 2.2.1), the kernel identifies the number of a disk inode by its position in the array. The disk inode does not need this field.
* Pointers to other in-core inodes. The kernel links inodes on hash queues and on a free list in the same way that it links buffers on buffer hash queues and on the buffer free list. A hash queue is identified according to the inode's logical device number and inode number. The kernel can contain at most one in-core copy of a disk inode, but inodes can be simultaneously on a hash queue and on the free list.
* A reference count, indicating the number of instances of the file that are active (such as when *opened*).

Many fields in the in-core inode are analogous to fields in the buffer header, and the management of inodes is similar to the management of buffers. The inode lock, when set, prevents other processes from accessing the inode; other processes set a flag in the inode when attempting to access it to indicate that they should be awakened when the lock is released. The kernel sets other flags to indicate discrepancies between the disk inode and the in-core copy. When the kernel needs to record changes to the file or to the inode, it writes the in-core copy of the inode to disk after examining these flags.

The most striking difference between an in-core inode and a buffer header is the in-core reference count, which counts the number of active instances of the file. An inode is active when a process allocates it, such as when *opening* a file. An inode is on the free list only if its reference count is 0, meaning that the kernel can reallocate the in-core inode to another disk inode. The free list of inodes thus serves as a cache of inactive inodes: If a process attempts to access a file whose inode is not currently in the in-core inode pool, the kernel reallocates an in-core inode from the free list for its use. On the other hand, a buffer has no reference count; it is on the free list if and only if it is unlocked.

```text
algorithm iget
input:  file system inode number
output: locked inode
{
  while (not done)
  {
    if (inode in inode cache)
    {
      if (inode locked)
      {
        sleep (event inode becomes unlocked);
        continue; /* loop back to while */
      }
      /* special processing for mount points (Chapter 5) */
      if (inode on inode free list)
        remove from free list;
      increment inode reference count;
      return (inode);
    }

    /* inode not in inode cache */
    if (no inodes on free list)
      return (error);
    remove new inode from free list;
    reset inode number and file system;
    remove inode from old hash queue, place on new one;
    read inode from disk (algorithm bread);
    initialize inode (e.g. reference count to 1);
    return (inode);
  }
}
```

**Figure 4.3.** Algorithm for Allocation of In-Core Inodes

## 4.1.2 Accessing Inodes

The kernel identifies particular inodes by their file system and inode number and allocates in-core inodes at the request of higher-level algorithms. The algorithm *iget* allocates an in-core copy of an inode (Figure 4.3); it is almost identical to the algorithm *getblk* for finding a disk block in the buffer cache. The kernel maps the device number and inode number into a hash queue and searches the queue for the inode. If it cannot find the inode, it allocates one from the free list and locks it. The kernel then prepares to read the disk copy of the newly accessed inode into the in-core copy. It already knows the inode number and logical device and computes the logical disk block that contains the inode according to how many disk inodes fit into a disk block. The computation follows the formula

```text
block num = ((inode number - 1) / number of inodes per block) + start block of inode list
```

where the division operation returns the integer part of the quotient. For example, assuming that block 2 is the beginning of the inode list and that there are 8 inodes per block, then inode number 8 is in disk block 2, and inode number 9 is in disk block 3. If there are 16 inodes in a disk block, then inode numbers 8 and 9 are in disk block 2, and inode number 17 is the first inode in disk block 3.

When the kernel knows the device and disk block number, it reads the block using the algorithm *bread* (Chapter 2), then uses the following formula to compute the byte offset of the inode in the block:

```text
((inode number - 1) modulo (number of inodes per block)) * size of disk inode
```

For example, if each disk inode occupies 64 bytes and there are 8 inodes per disk block, then inode number 8 starts at byte offset 448 in the disk block. The kernel removes the in-core inode from the free list, places it on the correct hash queue, and sets its in-core reference count to 1. It copies the file type, owner fields, permission settings, link count, file size, and the table of contents from the disk inode to the in-core inode, and returns a locked inode.

The kernel manipulates the inode lock and reference count independently. The lock is set during execution of a system call to prevent other processes from accessing the inode while it is in use (and possibly inconsistent). The kernel releases the lock at the conclusion of the system call: an inode is never locked
across system calls. The kernel increments the reference count for every active reference to a file. For example, Section 5.1 will show that it increments the inode reference count when a process *opens* a file. It decrements the reference count only when the reference becomes inactive, for example, when a process *closes* a file. The reference count thus remains set across multiple system calls. The lock is free between system calls to allow processes to share simultaneous access to a file; the reference count remains set between system calls to prevent the kernel from reallocating an active in-core inode. Thus, the kernel can lock and unlock an allocated inode independent of the value of the reference count. System calls other than *open* allocate and release inodes, as will be seen in Chapter 5.

Returning to algorithm *iget*, if the kernel attempts to take an inode from the free list but finds the free list empty, it reports an error. This is different from the philosophy the kernel follows for disk buffers, where a process sleeps until a buffer becomes free: Processes have control over the allocation of inodes at user level via execution of *open* and *close* system calls, and consequently the kernel cannot guarantee when an inode will become available. Therefore, a process that goes to sleep waiting for a free inode to become available may never wake up. Rather than leave such a process "hanging," the kernel fails the system call. However, processes do not have such control over buffers: Because a process cannot keep a buffer locked across system calls, the kernel can guarantee that a buffer will become free soon, and a process therefore sleeps until one is available.

The preceding paragraphs cover the case where the kernel allocated an inode that was not in the inode cache. If the inode is in the cache, the process (A) would find it on its hash queue and check if the inode was currently locked by another process (B). If the inode is locked, process A sleeps, setting a flag in the in-core inode to indicate that it is waiting for the inode to become free. When process B
later unlocks the inode, it awakens all processes (including process A) waiting for the inode to become free. When process A is finally able to use the inode, it locks the inode so that other processes cannot allocate it. If the reference count was previously 0, the inode also appears on the free list, so the kernel removes it from there: the inode is no longer free. The kernel increments the inode reference count
and returns a locked inode.

To summarize, the *iget* algorithm is used toward the beginning of system calls when a process first accesses a file. The algorithm returns a locked inode structure with reference count 1 greater than it had previously been. The in-core inode contains up-to-date information on the state of the file. The kernel unlocks the inode before returning from the system call so that other system calls can access
the inode if they wish. Chapter 5 treats these cases in greater detail.

```text
algorithm iput  /* release (put) access to in-core inode */
input:  pointer to in-core inode
output: none
{
  lock inode if not already locked;
  decrement inode reference count;
  if (reference count == 0)
  {
    if (inode link count == 0)
    {
      free disk blocks for file (algorithm free, section 4.7);
      set file type to 0;
      free inode (algorithm ifree, section 4.6);
    }
    if (file accessed or inode changed or file changed)
      update disk inode;
    put inode on free list;
  }
  release inode lock;
}
```

**Figure 4.4.** Releasing an Inode

## 4.1.3 Releasing modes

When the kernel releases an inode (algorithm *iput*, Figure 4.4), it decrements its in-core reference count. If the count drops to 0, the kernel writes the inode to disk if the in-core copy differs from the disk copy. They differ if the file data has changed, if the file access time has changed, or if the file owner or access permissions have changed. The kernel places the inode on the free list of inodes, effectively caching the inode in case it is needed again soon. The kernel may also release all data blocks associated with the file and free the inode if the number of links to the file is 0.
