---
title: "4.4 CONVERSION OF A PATH NAME TO AN INODE"
date: "2018-05-13T19:06:00+08:00"
---

The initial access to a file is by its path name, as in the *open*, *chdir* (change directory), or *link* system calls. Because the kernel works internally with inodes rather than with path names, it converts the path names to inodes to access files. The algorithm *namei* parses the path name one component at a time, converting each component into an inode based on its name and the directory being searched, and eventually returns the inode of the input path name (Figure 4.11).

```text
algorithm namei         /* convert path name to inode */
input:  path name
output: locked inode
{
    if (path name starts from root)
        working inode = root inode (algorithm iget);
    else
        working inode = current directory inode (algorithm iget);

    while (there is more path name)
    {
        read next path name component from input;
        verify that working inode is of directory, access permissions OK;
        if (working inode is of root and component is "..")
            continue; /* loop back to while */
        read directory (working inode) by repeated use of algorithms bmap, bread and brelse;
        if (component matches an entry in directory (working inode))
        {
            get inode number for matched component;
            release working inode (algorithm iput);
            working inode = inode of matched component (algorithm iget);
        }
        else    /* component not in directory */
            return (no inode);
    }
    return (working inode);
}
```

**Figure 4.11.** Algorithm for Conversion of a Path Name to an Inode

Recall from Chapter 2 that every process is associated with (resides in) a current directory; the *u area* contains a pointer to the current directory inode. The current directory of the first process in the system, process 0, is the root directory: The current directory of every other process starts out as the current directory of its parent process at the time it was created (see Section 5.10). Processes change their current directory by executing the *chdir* (change directory) system call. All path name searches start from the current directory of the process unless the path name starts with the slash character, signifying that the search should start from the root directory. In either case, the kernel can easily find the inode where the path name search starts: The current directory is stored in the process *u area*, and the system root inode is stored in a global variable.<sup>2</sup>

*Namei* uses intermediate inodes as it parses a path name; call them working inodes. The inode where the search starts is the first working inode. During each iteration of the *namei* loop, the kernel makes sure that the working inode is indeed that of a directory. Otherwise, the system would violate the assertion that non-directory files can only be leaf nodes of the file system tree. The process must also
have permission to search the directory (read permission is insufficient). The user ID of the process must match the owner or group ID of the file, and execute permission must be granted, or the file must allow search to all users. Otherwise the search fails.

The kernel does a linear search of the directory file associated with the working inode, trying to match the path name component to a directory entry name. Starting at byte offset 0, it converts the byte offset in the directory to the appropriate disk block according to algorithm *bmap* and reads the block using algorithm *bread*. It searches the block for the path name component, treating the contents of the block as a sequence of directory entries. If it finds a match, it records the inode number of the matched directory entry, releases the block (algorithm *brelse*) and the old working inode (algorithm *iput*), and allocates the inode of the matched component (algorithm *iget*). The new inode becomes the working inode. If the kernel does not match the path name with any names in the block, it releases the block, adjusts the byte offset by the number of bytes in a block, converts the new offset to a disk block number (algorithm *bmap*), and reads the next block. The kernel repeats the procedure until it matches the path name component with a directory entry name, or until it reaches the end of the directory.

For example, suppose a process wants to open the file "/etc/passwd". When the kernel starts parsing the file name, it encounters "/" and gets the system root inode. Making root its current working inode, the kernel gathers in the string "etc". After checking that the current inode is that of a directory ("/") and that the process has the necessary permissions to search it, the kernel searches root for a file whose name is "etc": It accesses the data in the root directory block by block and searches each block one entry at a time until it locates an entry for "etc". On finding the entry, the kernel releases the inode for root (algorithm *iput*) and allocates the inode for "etc" (algorithm *iget*) according to the inode number of the entry just found. After ascertaining that "etc" is a directory and that it has the
requisite search permissions, the kernel searches "etc" block by block for a directory structure entry for the file "passwd". Referring to Figure 4.10, it would find the entry for "passwd" as the ninth entry of the directory. On finding it, the kernel releases the inode for "etc", allocates the inode for "passwd", and - since the path name is exhausted - returns that inode.

It is natural to question the efficiency of a linear search of a directory for a path name component. Ritchie points out (see page 1968 of [Ritchie 78b]) that a linear search is efficient because it is bounded by the size of the directory. Furthermore, early UNIX system implementations did not run or machines with large memory space, so there was heavy emphasis on simple algorithms such as linear search
schemes. More complicated search schemes could require a different, more complex, directory structure, and would probably run more slowly on small directories than the linear search scheme.

------

2\. A process can execute the *chroot* system call to change its notion of the file system root. The changed root is stored in the *u area*.