---
title: "4.9 SUMMARY"
date: "2018-05-13T20:47:00+08:00"
---

The inode is the data structure that describes the attributes of a file, including the layout of its data on disk. There are two versions of the inode: the disk copy that stores the inode information when the file is not in use and the in-core copy that records information about active files. Algorithms *ialloc* and *ifree* control assignment of a disk inode to a file during the *creat*, *mknod*, *pipe*, and *unlink* system calls (next chapter), and the algorithms *iget* and *iput* control the allocation of in-core inodes when a process accesses a file. Algorithm *bmap* locates the disk blocks of a file, according to a previously supplied byte offset in the file. Directories are files that correlate file name components to inode numbers. Algorithm *namei* converts file names manipulated by processes to inodes, used internally by the kernel. Finally, the kernel controls assignment of new disk blocks to a file using algorithms *alloc* and *free*.

The data structures discussed in this chapter consist of linked lists, hash queues, and linear arrays, and the algorithms that manipulate the data structures are therefore simple. Complications arise due to race conditions caused by the interaction of the algorithms, and the text has indicated some of these timing problems. Nevertheless, the algorithms are not elaborate and illustrate the simplicity of the system design.

The structures and algorithms explained here are internal to the kernel and are not visible to the user. Referring to the overall system architecture (Figure 2.1), the algorithms described in this chapter occupy the lower half of the file subsystem. The next chapter examines the system calls that provide the user interface to the file system, and it describes the upper half of the file subsystem that invokes the
internal algorithms described here.